We are all explorers. Our desire to discover, and then share that new knowledge, is part of what makes us human, indeed, this has played an important part in our success as a species. Long before the first caveman slumped down beside the fire and grunted news that there were plenty of wildebeest over yonder, our ancestors had learnt the value of sending out scouts to investigate the unknown. This questing nature of ours undoubtedly helped our species spread around the globe, just as it nowadays no doubt helps the last nomadic Penan maintain their existence in the depleted forests of Borneo, and a visitor negotiate the subways of New York.
Over the years, we have come to think of explorers as a peculiar breed, different from the rest of us, different from those of us who are merely well travelled, even; and perhaps there is a type of person more suited to seeking out the new, a type of caveman more inclined to risk venturing out. That, however, doesn’t take away from the fact that we all have this enquiring instinct, even today; and that in all sorts of professions, whether artist, marine biologist or astronomer, borders of the unknown are being tested each day.
Thomas Hardy set some of his novels in Egdon Heath, a fictional area of uncultivated land, and used the landscape to suggest the desires and fears of his characters. He is delving into matters we all recognise because they are common to humanity. This is surely an act of exploration, and into a world as remote as the author chooses. Explorer and travel writer Peter Fleming talks of the moment when the explorer returns to the existence he has left behind with his loved ones. The traveller who has for weeks or months seen himself only as a puny and irrelevant alien crawling laboriously over a country in which he has no roots and no background, suddenly encounters his other self, a relatively solid figure, with a place in the minds of certain people.
In this book about the exploration of the earth surface, I have confined myself to those whose travels were real and who also aimed at more than personal discovery. But that still left me with another problem: the word explorer has become associated with a past era. We think back to a golden age, as if exploration peaked somehow in the nineteenth century, as if the process of discovery is now on the decline, though the truth is that we have named only one and a half million of this planet species, and there may be more than ten million and that is not including bacteria. We have studied only five per cent of the species we know. We have scarcely mapped the ocean floors, and know even less about ourselves; we fully understand the workings of only ten per cent of our brains.

